# Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Modeling Diffusion in Plant Science This repository contains a Python implementation of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) aimed at modeling diffusion processes relevant to plant science. By integrating neural networks with physical principles, this approach allows for the effective simulation and analysis of diffusion phenomena, which are crucial for understanding various biological processes in plants. ## Table of Contents - [Installation](#installation) - [Usage](#usage) - [Code Overview](#code-overview) - [Model Architecture](#model-architecture) - [Loss Functions](#loss-functions) - [Training Procedure](#training-procedure) - [Visualization](#visualization) - [Diffusion PDE and Its Applications in Plant Science](#diffusion-pde-and-its-applications-in-plant-science) - [Full Diffusion Equation](#full-diffusion-equation) - [Chosen Boundary and Initial Conditions](#chosen-boundary-and-initial-conditions) - [Example Data](#example-data) - [License](#license) ## Installation To run this code, ensure you have the following dependencies installed: ```bash pip install numpy tensorflow matplotlib ``` ## Usage 1. Clone the repository: ```bash git clone <repository-url> cd <repository-directory> ``` 2. Run the script: ```bash python <script-name>.py ``` The script will train the PINN model and produce plots of the diffusion solution at a fixed time, along with an animation showing the evolution of the solution over time. ## Code Overview ### Model Architecture The model is defined using the `PINN` class, which inherits from `tf.keras.Model`. The architecture consists of: - Two hidden layers with 20 neurons each and `tanh` activation functions. - An output layer that provides the predicted value \( u(x,t) \), representing the diffusion process. ```python class PINN(tf.keras.Model): ... ``` ### Loss Functions The loss function is composed of three components: 1. **PDE Loss:** Measures the residual of the diffusion PDE. 2. **Boundary Loss:** Ensures that boundary conditions are satisfied. 3. **Initial Loss:** Enforces initial conditions based on the diffusion process. The total loss is computed as follows: ```python def compute_loss(...): ... ``` ### Training Procedure The training process involves defining an optimizer with a learning rate schedule and a training loop that runs for a specified number of epochs. During each epoch, the gradients are calculated, and the model weights are updated to minimize the total loss. ```python def train_pinn(epochs=100): ... ``` ### Visualization Two visualization functions are included: 1. **Plotting for a Fixed Time:** Displays the model's prediction of diffusion at a specified time \( t \). ```python def plot_fixed_time(model, t_val): ... ``` 2. **Animation of Solution Over Time:** Creates an animated GIF showing how the diffusion solution evolves as time progresses. ```python def animate_solution(model): ... ``` ## Diffusion PDE and Its Applications in Plant Science The diffusion partial differential equation (PDE) describes how substances such as nutrients, water, and gases spread out over time within a medium. The most common form of the diffusion equation in one dimension is: \[ \frac{\partial u(x,t)}{\partial t} = D \frac{\partial^2 u(x,t)}{\partial x^2} + f(x,t) \] where: - \( u(x,t) \) is the concentration of the diffusing substance at position \( x \) and time \( t \), - \( D \) is the diffusion coefficient, which quantifies how fast the substance diffuses through the medium, - \( f(x,t) \) is an external source term representing additional sources or sinks of the substance in the system. ### Applications in Plant Science 1. **Nutrient Uptake:** The diffusion PDE can model how nutrients move through soil and into plant roots, helping to optimize fertilizer application and improve plant growth. 2. **Water Movement:** Water diffusion through plant tissues (e.g., leaves, stems) can be described using diffusion equations, crucial for studying transpiration and irrigation practices. 3. **Gas Exchange:** The diffusion of gases (such as oxygen and carbon dioxide) within plant tissues is vital for processes like photosynthesis and respiration. 4. **Pesticide and Herbicide Application:** The diffusion of chemical substances like pesticides in soil and plant tissues can be modeled to assess the effectiveness and environmental impact of these chemicals. 5. **Disease Spread:** Plant diseases can spread through diffusion of pathogens in the soil or within plant tissues, helping to develop strategies for disease management. In summary, the diffusion PDE serves as a fundamental tool in plant science for modeling various processes related to the movement of substances, providing insights that can enhance agricultural practices and plant health. ## Full Diffusion Equation In the current implementation, we choose the external source term \( f(x,t) = 0 \). This simplifies the equation to: \[ \frac{\partial u(x,t)}{\partial t} = D \frac{\partial^2 u(x,t)}{\partial x^2} \] By setting \( f(x,t) = 0 \), we focus on the natural diffusion process without any external influences, allowing us to analyze the fundamental behavior of the diffusion process. ## Chosen Boundary and Initial Conditions ### Boundary Conditions In this model, we define boundary conditions that can represent the physical constraints of the system. The boundary conditions are set such that: - At the left boundary \( u(0,t) = 0 \): The concentration at position \( x = 0 \) is fixed at 0. - At the right boundary \( u(1,t) = 0 \): The concentration at position \( x = 1 \) is also fixed at 0. These conditions may represent scenarios where the substance cannot enter or leave the system at the boundaries, simulating a closed environment. ### Initial Conditions The initial condition is set as: \[ u(x,0) = \sin(\pi x) \] This choice provides an initial distribution of the diffusing substance, simulating a sinusoidal concentration profile along the spatial domain. The use of this initial condition helps to visualize how the diffusion process evolves over time. ## Example Data The script includes example data for training, which consists of random samples for spatial and temporal domains, along with initial and boundary conditions based on a sinusoidal function. This simulates the diffusion behavior typical in plant systems. ```python x_train = np.random.rand(100, 1).astype(np.float32) ... ``` ## License This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for details.
